# Specky

A spectrogram viewing application that allows you to quickly label short `WAV` or `MP3` clips using a combination of their sound and their spectrogram.

## Installing & running `specky`
Clone specky:
```
git clone https://github.com/rhine3/specky.git
cd specky
```

Install the Python environment needed by Specky using conda:
```
conda env create --file conda_environment.yaml --name specky_env
```

Install ffmpeg on your computer if you wish to annotate .mp3 files:
* Instructions for Windows users: https://www.wikihow.com/Install-FFmpeg-on-Windows
* Instructions for Mac users: [install with HomeBrew (`brew install ffmpeg`)](http://jollejolles.com/install-ffmpeg-on-mac-os-x/)
* For Linux users: use your system's package manager to install ffmpeg, e.g. `sudo apt-get install ffmpeg`

Now you should be able to run Specky inside your environment:
```
conda activate specky_env
python application.py
# Use specky
# Print statements will appear here in the Terminal as you are using Specky
conda deactivate specky_env
```

## Using `specky` to label spectrogram clips
Specky's "Assess Folder" feature allows you to label one or multiple attributes of `.WAV` or `.MP3` files. It is easier to use specky to analyze short clips (on the scale of several seconds long) than long clips, which will not display as nicely in the interface.

To use this feature, click on the "Assess Folder" option. You will need to give Specky three things.

### Directory
Give Specky a directory and it finds all .WAV and .MP3 files in the directory, even those in subfolders of the directory you selected. You can select a directory either by typing one out, or choosing one with the file selection dialog.

### Labels
The output of this process is a .csv file, formatted like the following.
```
filename,species_present,call_type
/path/to/file1.wav,present,song
/path/to/file2.mp3,absent,na
/path/to/file3.wav,present,call
```

The assessment process allows you to assign **labels** to **variables**. 
* In the above output, two **variables** are assessed: `species_present` and `call_type`. Variables are different criteria on which you want to assess the call.
* Different **labels** are possible for each of these variables. For instance, in the example above, the `species_present` variable contains the labels `present` and `absent`. The `call_type` variable is shown with three labels: `song`, `na`, and `call`. 

The options for labels appear as buttons in the interface. Currently, you must select exactly one label per variable. For instance, you can't select both `song` and `call` for the `call_type` variable. Likewise, you can't leave one variable unlabeled. In future versions, I hope to allow specification of a minimum and maximum number of labels you can choose for each column.

By default, Specky uses the following labels, which automatically appear in the "Assess folder" popup.
```
species_present,present,absent,unsure
sound_type,song,call,unsure,na
```

To create your own assessment labels, create a .csv with the following format, or type in this format in the box:
```
variable_A,A_label1,A_label2,...,A_labelX
variable_B,B_label1,B_label2,...,B_label3Y
```
 
You don't have to use the same number of labels for each variable.


### Step-by-step
* Put your clips into one directory. `specky` finds all clips inside a directory and all of its subdirectories, so it is fine if your clips are separated into multiple subdirectories.
* Create a "labels" file of the format described above, if desired. Otherwise, the default assessment criteria will be used
* Download specky and create a virtual environment using the instructions above
* Activate the virtual environment and run `python application.py`
* Click the "assess folder" button
* Select or type which folder you want to review clips from
* To select the labels to use, either:
  - Type in labels in the format described above
  - Click the "Choose file" button and navigate to the "labels" csv you created above
  - Do nothing to use the default labels
* Name the file that you want to contain the results of your assessment from. If no name is selected, `specky` automatically creates a file, `assessment.csv`, within the folder you are reviewing clips from. If the filename chosen by you or generated by specky already exists, then you can choose one of the following options:
  - Picking up the assessment where you left off (only works if the variables in this file are the same as the variables you specified in the step above)
  - Overwriting the old assessment file
  - Selecting a different filename
* Assess the files by clicking one label per variable and clicking "next" when needed
